676
Chapter 14. Graph Algorithms
14.7.2
Kruskal’s Algorithm
In this section, we introduce Kruskal’s algorithm for constructing a minimum span-
ning tree. While the Prim-Jarn´
ık algorithm builds the MST by growing a single tree
until it spans the graph, Kruskal’s algorithm maintains a forest of clusters, repeat-
edly merging pairs of clusters until a single cluster spans the graph.
Initially, each vertex is by itself in a singleton cluster. The algorithm then
considers each edge in turn, ordered by increasing weight. If an edge e connects
two different clusters, then e is added to the set of edges of the minimum spanning
tree, and the two clusters connected by e are merged into a single cluster. If, on the
other hand, e connects two vertices that are already in the same cluster, then e is
discarded. Once the algorithm has added enough edges to form a spanning tree, it
terminates and outputs this tree as the minimum spanning tree.
We give pseudo-code for Kruskal’s MST algorithm in Code Fragment 14.17
and we show an example of this algorithm in Figures 14.22, 14.23, and 14.24.
Algorithm Kruskal(G):
Input: A simple connected weighted graph G with n vertices and m edges
Output: A minimum spanning tree T for G
for each vertex v in G do
Deﬁne an elementary cluster C(v) = {v}.
Initialize a priority queue Q to contain all edges in G, using the weights as keys.
T = ∅
{T will ultimately contain the edges of the MST}
while T has fewer than n−1 edges do
(u,v) = value returned by Q.remove min()
Let C(u) be the cluster containing u, and let C(v) be the cluster containing v.
if C(u) ̸= C(v) then
Add edge (u,v) to T.
Merge C(u) and C(v) into one cluster.
return tree T
Code Fragment 14.17: Kruskal’s algorithm for the MST problem.
As was the case with the Prim-Jarn´
ık algorithm, the correctness of Kruskal’s al-
gorithm is based upon the crucial fact about minimum spanning trees from Propo-
sition 14.25. Each time Kruskal’s algorithm adds an edge (u,v) to the minimum
spanning tree T, we can deﬁne a partitioning of the set of vertices V (as in the
proposition) by letting V1 be the cluster containing v and letting V2 contain the rest
of the vertices in V. This clearly deﬁnes a disjoint partitioning of the vertices of
V and, more importantly, since we are extracting edges from Q in order by their
weights, e must be a minimum-weight edge with one vertex in V1 and the other in
V2. Thus, Kruskal’s algorithm always adds a valid minimum spanning tree edge.
